rogue and free-floating planets if
nature finds it very easy to form lots
of fur these brown dwarfs and we're
finding more and more of them the more
we look then surely it must be able to
make smaller objects more easily again
and so perhaps we should expect to find
small sub brown dwarf sized objects out
there sort of large gas giants like
Jupiter in great abundance wandering the
the galaxy to reminds me of this 1951
movie when worlds collide actually this
was when a the plot was when as a rogue
star called Bellus swept through the
solar system and destroyed the earth and
mankind had to built this build this
magnificent rocketship that you see in
the picture here launched it from a
track as a kind of space Ark to go to
the fictional planet
Zyra that was supposed to be in orbit
round Bellis and of course the good guys
won and they made it plot spoiler for
you but that we might not get any
warning of an object like this coming
our way we might get an interstellar
visitor linking back to that other topic
of things that come in from deep space
that might be a rather larger than your
typical asteroid and could just be a
giant planet sized object they'll be
really quite tricky to spot at any
distance until it was coming upon us and
certainly could be so large that we
wouldn't be able to deflect it now
people have come up with
for in terms for these rogue or
free-floating planets that orbit the
galaxy on their own without an
accompanying parent star other terms
used interstellar planet Nomad planet
wandering planets I hate that one
because planet means wanderer in Greek
so it's a wandering wanderer orphan
planets well implies it had a parent and
it's lost it
which should might not be true starless
or sunless planet hmm and the worst of
all plan emo I really hate that so I
call them rogue planets which makes them
sound much more intriguing of course
there are two possibilities one is that
they could have formed completely
independently of any star system just in
the same way that stars form but on a
smaller scale out of a collapsing nebula
or they could have been formed in a
solar system and then ejected from it by
a near-miss or a slingshot effect with
one of the other objects in that system
so perhaps there might be formed
independently we might have the
sub-brown dwarf sized objects I didn't
reach that 13 Jupiter mass limits to be
called a brown dwarf because they can't
trigger nuclear fusion in the core
that's one possible thing or they could
be ejected by the chaotic orbits in a
complicated solar system early on this
can happen especially if you had perhaps
a binary star system that had formed a
bunch of planets as well one of them
could have a near-miss with one of the
binary companions and be shot out into
deep space on a parabolic orbit or a
hyperbolic orbit never to return
so can we detect these rogue planets out
there roaming the galaxy well we could
try and image them directly
the other way of doing it might be to
look using the method we use for planets
that orbit other stars well those are in
the main the Doppler shift caused to the
parent star when there's a planet
orbiting it so we can't use that because
there is no parent star in attendance
and the transit method where we see them
move across the face of their parent
star and block out some of the light
that's discovered some 5000 planets
using that method now
well again no parent star so we can't do
it I have to try and spot them directly
and we've got a couple of telescopes up
there that are very good at this because
they're infrared telescopes those
spitzer and there's the Y field infrared
telescope called wise and both of these
are very good at looking for the
infrared signature of a warm object
against the cold of space and it
OTS 44 is a sub brown dwarf quite a
large one
it's 11.5 times the mass of Jupiter so
just below that brown dwarf limit and
it's quite big it's 25% the radius of
the Sun so it might well be that it's a
dust disk or proto planetary disc in the
process of forming still and quite warm
with a temperature of 2,000 degrees so
this is either a brown dwarf with a dust
ring around it or potentially a
protostar that has not yet reached the
density to kick off nuclear fusion so
it's either a failed star or it hasn't
really had time yet so
be smaller we found an 8 solar mass
object just 1.8 times the radius of
Jupiter so this is a planets this is a
gas giant planet quite a large super
Jupiter and it's 163 light years away
and being directly imaged and again
seems to have a dust ring around it so
maybe in the process of forming its own
climate or in or moons systems orbiting
around this free-floating separate
planet I've got a couple that are fairly
nearby the Sun again nearby ones are
easier to detect the little animation
there is the Weezer o85 507 1/4 object
which is a 5 jupiter-mass planets again
1.8 times the radius of Jupiter so
definitely a planet fairly cold 250
degrees Kelvin so hotter than Jupiter
that's 125 and so it's definitely you
know quite a big object as a certain
amount of trapped heat in the center
still and it's fairly nearby 7.3
light-years away puts it in our solar
system's backyard this one and possible
water clouds in the upper layers of it
so very interesting object indeed
another Weezer discovery it won't read
out the number is a binary brown dwarf
with two fairly large objects 35 and 45
masses of Jupiter that's also in our
backyard but those are definitely brown
dwarfs rather than a a rogue planet when
you see the little map of the Sun your
cloud and alpha and Proxima Centuri
system but just over four light-years
Barnard's star a red dwarf at six
lightyears and then we've got these
these other objects there are not that
far away too far away to be the Nemesis
object though but list here I'm not
going to go through this but just shows
there's OTS 44 that we mentioned and the
Weiser objects there that we talked
about there's quite a long list of
potential free-floating planets you can
see the masses are anything from two
times the mass of Jupiter up to the
point where they're really becoming
brown dwarfs and the way that we've also
been able to do a bit of a survey for
these it's a very clever trick called
gravitational microlensing this is a bit
like the transit method except it
doesn't rely on the planet being in
orbit around the star it can be any
background star if it crosses in front
of the line of sight then Einstein's
relativity tells us that the path of a
light from the background star will be
focused slightly as a lens a
gravitational lens by the gravity of the
passing planet and it's a strong-enough
effect but it can cause a significant
change in the overall brightness
suddenly rather more of the light gets
delivered to the telescope and you can
see a detection curve along the bottom
there where a particular star was being
monitored and then suddenly brightened
I just over a whole magnitude and then
faded away again in a neat symmetrical
bell-shaped curve as the wandering
object moved in front of it and that was
a detection of a planet and we can
estimate the mass of the planet by the
size and shape and the curve and we come
to estimate how fast it's moving as well
the trouble is we can only generally
catch this particular object once
because it's not in orbit it's not going
to come round and do the same thing
again and the chance of the same object
being able to be identified passing
another star well it's just hopeless so
we really only get to see them once but
what we can do is count how many of
these in Fruity we've been getting
better at it and you can see that the
first objects were detected back in the
early 90s 1993 we detected a micro
lensing event but now there's more than
a thousand of these being detected and
it can also detect very small planets
not much larger than the earth and
there's one or two that are around five
times the mass of the earth which makes
them a lot lot smaller than Jupiter and
it's very useful to be able to do this
to get some idea of this mix of sizes
and numbers of these rogue planets
wandering around the Milky Way from a
health and safety point of view they are
a bit of a menace but from a science
point of view they're also very useful
because we've been able to prove that
they don't add up to enough mess to
account for the problem that's
attributed to what we call Dark Matter
the fact that the orbital velocities of
stars in galaxies are too fast for the
amount of mass that should be keeping
them in orbit that's another whole story
but this is just another piece of
evidence towards it
and of course we have this idea that in
our solar system early on when it was
forming it probably began with five
giant planets but as Jupiter was growing
and picking up all the material around
it it spiraled inwards until it got into
a resonant two-to-one orbital period
relationship with Saturn and then bad
things happen here it starts with five
planets and all the Kuiper belt objects
in green and here one of them gets
kicked out and we end up with the four
giant planets that we know today
and all the Kuiper belt objects rather
scattered so here it is with the neat
Kuiper belt again it runs and then here
the interaction happens and one of the
planets gets thrown out and in fact when
we run computer simulations this is
pretty much the only way that we can get
the simulation to come out looking right
so it's quite probable that they a fifth
giant planets existed and got hurled out
of the solar system whether it hurt was
hurled far enough to escape completely
or not we can't tell it might still be
out there and if it is maybe this is
part of the evidence for it this is some
of the scattered disk objects out of the
outer reaches of the Kuiper belt we've
discovered Sedna and then a few other
Sedna like objects in these long
elliptical orbits that carry them around
the Sun in periods like ten thousand
years for the orbit compared and there's
something curious this diagram is
correct all of their orbits point
outwards to one side of the solar system
and have their close approach on the
other side
the only way we thought of to account
for this is be a ninth giant planets out
there orbiting the Sun controlling all
of this that we just haven't discovered
and again Harkes back a little bit to
the Nemesis hypothesis of a of a Suns
companion only this time we're talking
about something with planetary mass not
brown dwarf or stellar mass but it still
could be a significant player in the
long history of the solar system but we
don't know that it's there and surveys
are beginning to rule it out beginning
to narrow down the range of
possibilities it's either too far away
or too small for the surveys to detect
and as time goes on the possibility for
it to be significant is dwindling away
so that's the story of rogue planets
thank you very much for listening to
that one and as I said it links together
with the brown dwarf and interstellar
talks quite nicely I think because the
the three are really quite strongly
related